Where Affirmative Action Succeeded—and Where It Fell Short
 Affirmative action just means different things in different places,” said Zach Bleemer, an economics professor at the Yale School of Management who studied the impact of California’s 1996 ban on race-conscious admissions. “Because most of society doesn’t enroll at selective universities, the societal effects are necessarily limited.”The Supreme Court’s landmark ruling Thursday found the consideration of race in university admissions unconstitutional, raising questions about the future of race-conscious decisions in other parts of American life—and how impactful such considerations have been to date. The decision eliminated the principal tool the nation’s most exclusive schools have used to diversify their campuses.The number of Black identifying students enrolled in Ivy League universities increased by 61% between 1980 and 2020, according to federal data. Populations of Hispanic and Asian students each more than quadrupled over the same period.Advertisement


“Race conscious admissions have been very effective at selective universities, although it varies state to state,” said Julie Park, an associate professor of education at the University of Maryland. “Schools that are unable to consider race,” she said, “have struggled to keep their student bodies at pace with the diversifying of the general population.”Julie Park, associate professor of education at the University of Maryland. Photo: University of MarylandRecent decennial census data indicated that Latinos, Asians and other groups drove all U.S. population growth during the past decade, as America’s white population shrank for the first time.Studies have shown that minorities, after graduating, have attained foot-in-the-door positions but leadership roles largely remain out of reach in the legal world, hospitals and corporate boardrooms.As of 2021, 86% of Fortune 500 chief executives were white men, according to SHRM, a trade organization for HR professionals. Only a handful of Fortune 500 companies have Black CEOs, and people of color remain underrepresented across a host of senior-level positions. A 2021 report by McKinsey & Co. found that under current trajectories, it would take about 95 years for Black employees to reach talent parity across all levels of the private sector.“Affirmative action, as initially conceived, was designed to prevent overt explicit racial and gender discrimination against people of color, and women,” said Jay Pearson, dean of diversity, equity and inclusion at Duke University’s Sanford School of Public Policy. “The real measure [of success] will be when no populations are overrepresented.”

“Something has to set you apart from the competition, and for some people it might be your story and your experiences,” said Deschamps, now a civil engineer for the Defense Department based in Camp Lejeune, N.C. She transferred from Emory after a year and graduated from the University of Florida in 2010.The Supreme Court has banned colleges from using race as admission criteria, essentially ending affirmative action. California did the same 25 years ago. WSJ explains how what happened then can offer a road map what could happen now. Photo Illustration: Madeline MarshallUniversity officials have insisted no substitute for racial preferences exists that can ensure that a representative share of minority applicants—particularly Black students—gains admission to selective institutions.In the Supreme Court’s 2003 ruling that allowed the narrow use of racial preferences in admissions, Justice Sandra Day O’Connor said she hoped that such preferences wouldn’t be needed in 25 years to ensure the diversity that universities were seeking. Today, a range of observers in academic and professional settings say her goals have proved more aspirational than achievable in that time frame.“Despite Justice O’Connor’s best hopes, to put it simply, the job is not done,” the HR Policy Association said in a court brief. The group represents the chief human resource officers of more than 400 of the largest corporations.As noted by the NAACP in a brief it filed with the court, students of color are still underrepresented in advanced classes. And Black and Hispanic students largely remain as underrepresented in medical school as they were roughly 40 years ago, researchers reported in the New England Journal of Medicine in 2021 (the same is true for Native American, Alaska Native and Hawaiian or Pacific Islander students).

But white men are disproportionately represented in equity partner ranks, indicating firms are struggling with retention and promotion of the underrepresented attorneys they are getting in the door. In 2022 only 22.6% of women had this top position at firms. For people of color, only 9% held equity partner positions. For nonequity partnerships, women represented 33% and people of color just 13%. 